# vmm-serde

## Design

A common requirement for virtual machine snapshot, live migration and live upgrading is to
serialize and deserialize VMM internal objects and data structures. The rust community has 
the excellent serde/serde_derive framework for data serialization/deserialization. But the
serde/serde_derive framework have very heavy dependency chain, and it's a common concern of the
rust-vmm project to reduce dependency chain as small as possible. So this helper crate uses
features to opt-in data serialization/deserialization functionality.

Currently there are three features defined:
- Feature `export_as_pub`

The data serializer often needs to access private data structures or private fields in data
structures. But rust has no support for `friend` visibility yet, though there's proposals for 
C++ like `friend` relationship. So a proc macro `export_as_pub()` is introduced to rewrite private
data structs/fields as `pub` when the feature `export_as_pub` is enabled. Otherwise
`export_as_pub()` becomes a null operation.

- Feature `serde_derive`

When the `serde_derive` feature is enabled, the proc_macro_derive for Serialize/Deserialize is
reexported from the serde_derive crate, otherwise `#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize)]` becomes
a null operation.

- Feature `serde_derive_ffi`

Often the bindgen utiltily is used to auto-generate FFI bindings for Linux syscalls and system
libraries. And data structures with flexible array member are often used for input and/or output
parameters. So three derive macros, SerializeFfi, DeserializeFfi and DeserializeFfiFam, are
introduced to serialize data structures generated by bindgen.

## Examples

- Export all fields of a data struct as `pub`

The `struct VmmObject`, field `state` and field `features` will be rewritten as `pub` when the
`export_as_pub` feature is enabled.
```rust
extern crate vmm_serde;

#[vmm_serde::export_as_pub()]
pub(crate) struct VmmObject {
    state: u32,
    pub(crate) features: u64,
}
```

- Export selected fields of a data struct as `pub`

The `struct VmmObject` and field `features` will be rewritten as `pub` when the
`export_as_pub` feature is enabled.
```
extern crate vmm_serde;

[vmm_serde::export_as_pub(features)]
pub(crate) struct VmmObject {
    state: u32,
    pub(crate) features: u64,
}
```

- Opt-in/Opt-out \#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize)]

Use feature `serde_derive` to opt-in/opt-out Serialize/Deserialize
```
extern crate vmm_serde;
use vmm_serde::{Serialize, Deserialize};

#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize)]
pub struct VmmObject {
    state: u32,
}
```

- Serialize/Deserialize Fix-sized FFI Data Structure

Implement Serialize/Deserialize traits for `kvm_memory_alias`.
```
# extern crate vmm_serde;
# use vmm_serde::*;

#[repr(C)]
#[derive(Debug, Default, Copy, Clone, PartialEq, SerializeFfi, DeserializeFfi)]
pub struct kvm_memory_alias {
   pub slot: u32,
   pub flags: u32,
   pub guest_phys_addr: u64,
   pub memory_size: u64,
   pub target_phys_addr: u64,
}
```

- Serialize/Deserialize FFI Data Structure with Flexible Array Member

Implment `Serialize` trait and add deserialize() method to `kvm_msrs`.
```
# extern crate vmm_serde;
# use vmm_serde::*;

#[repr(C)]
#[derive(Default, Debug, SerializeFfi, DeserializeFfi)]
pub struct __IncompleteArrayField<T>(::std::marker::PhantomData<T>, [T; 0]);
impl<T> __IncompleteArrayField<T> {
   #[inline]
   pub fn new() -> Self {
       __IncompleteArrayField(::std::marker::PhantomData, [])
   }
}

#[repr(C)]
#[derive(Debug, Default, SerializeFfi, DeserializeFfiFam)]
pub struct kvm_msrs {
   pub nmsrs: u32,
   pub pad: u32,
   pub entries: __IncompleteArrayField<u64>,
}

impl SizeofFamStruct for kvm_msrs {
   fn size_of(&self) -> usize {
        self.nmsrs as usize * std::mem::size_of::<u64>() + std::mem::size_of::<Self>()
   }
}
```

## License
This project is licensed under

- Apache License, Version 2.0
- BSD 3 Clause

